.TH RUFUSARM64-CLI 1 "16 July 2026" "RufusArm64 0.9.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
rufusarm64-cli \- safely create bootable USB media on Linux
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B rufusarm64-cli list
.RI [ --all ]
.RI [ --json ]
.PP
.B rufusarm64-cli inspect
.BI --image " FILE"
.RI [ --json ]
.PP
.B sudo rufusarm64-cli write
.BI --image " FILE"
.BI --device " /dev/DEVICE"
.RI [ options ]
.PP
.B sudo rufusarm64-cli write
.B --mode linux-persistent
.B --experimental-persistence
.BI --image " FILE"
.BI --device " /dev/DEVICE"
.RI [ --persistence-size " SIZE" ]
.PP
.B sudo rufusarm64-cli verify
.BI --image " FILE"
.BI --device " /dev/DEVICE"
.PP
.B rufusarm64-cli hash
.I FILE
.PP
.B rufusarm64-cli acquire channel list
.RI [ --config " FILE" ]
.RI [ --cache-dir " DIRECTORY" ]
.RI [ --offline ]
.RI [ --json ]
.PP
.B rufusarm64-cli acquire channel download
.BI --id " ID"
.RI [ --output " FILE|DIR" ]
.RI [ --replace ]
.RI [ --config " FILE" ]
.RI [ --cache-dir " DIRECTORY" ]
.RI [ --offline ]
.RI [ --json ]
.RI [ --json-progress ]
.PP
.B rufusarm64-cli persistence plan
.BI --image " FILE"
.BI --media-root " DIRECTORY"
.BI --target-size " SIZE"
.RI [ --size " SIZE" ]
.RI [ --json ]
.PP
.B sudo rufusarm64-cli persistence analyze
.BI --image " FILE"
.BI --expected-source-identity " ID"
.BI --target-size " SIZE"
.RI [ --size " SIZE" ]
.RI [ --cancel-file " FILE" ]
.RI [ --json ]
.PP
.B sudo rufusarm64-cli qualify start
.BI --record " FILE"
.BI --output " FILE"
.RI [ --state-dir " DIRECTORY" ]
.RI [ --json ]
.PP
.B sudo rufusarm64-cli qualify verify
.BI --record " FILE"
.BI --output " FILE"
.RI [ --state-dir " DIRECTORY" ]
.RI [ --json ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B rufusarm64-cli
writes recognized GPT/MBR disk images and ISOHybrid Linux images directly, or
creates extracted Windows installation media. Windows media support GPT or MBR,
UEFI or x86-family BIOS/CSM, and Automatic, FAT32, or NTFS selection.
FAT32 media split oversized WIM/ESD files. NTFS/UEFI media add a pinned
UEFI:NTFS partition. BIOS/CSM media install an active MBR partition and
BOOTMGR-compatible MBR/PBR boot code. Compressed images are expanded privately before erasure; VHD, VHDX, QCOW2, and VMDK inputs are flattened with qemu-img.
.SH WRITE OPTIONS
.TP
.B --verify
Flush block buffers and compare copied data after writing. Recommended.
.TP
.B --experimental-persistence
Enable the CLI-only experimental GPT/UEFI persistent Linux writer. This flag is accepted only with
.BR --mode " linux-persistent"
and is rejected by the graphical privileged path.
.TP
.BI --persistence-size " SIZE"
Set the ext4 persistence partition size using bytes or K/M/G/T units. Zero uses all aligned space remaining after the writable FAT32 boot partition. The initial implementation requires at least 1 GiB.
.TP
.BI --partition-scheme " gpt|mbr"
Choose the partition table for extracted Windows media. GPT is the default.
BIOS/CSM requires MBR.
.TP
.BI --target-system " uefi|bios"
Choose UEFI (non-CSM) or legacy BIOS/UEFI-CSM. BIOS is accepted only for MBR
media made from a compatible x86 or x86-64 Windows ISO containing root
.BR bootmgr .
Windows ARM64 is UEFI-only.
.TP
.BI --filesystem " auto|fat32|ntfs"
Choose the Windows-media filesystem. Automatic prefers FAT32 when every path and
file can be represented safely and otherwise selects NTFS. FAT32 splits an
oversized Windows installation image. NTFS/UEFI uses the bundled UEFI:NTFS
loader; NTFS/BIOS uses the Windows BOOTMGR partition boot record.
.TP
.BI --cluster-size " auto|4096|8192|16384|32768"
Choose the allocation-unit size for extracted Windows media.
.TP
.BI --dbx-file " FILE"
Parse a Microsoft DBXUpdate.bin or raw EFI signature database and reject Windows EFI boot files whose Authenticode hash or embedded X.509 certificate is revoked. This does not modify firmware.
.TP
.BI --driver-folder " DIRECTORY"
Validate a directory containing complete Windows driver packages and copy it to
.BR USB\\drivers .
The generated windowsPE answer file attempts to load each .inf package before
disk selection. The same folder remains available through Windows Setup's
.B Load driver
button. Drivers are not injected into boot.wim.
.TP
.B --full-format
Zero-write the complete new Windows data partition before formatting.
.TP
.B --bad-block-check
Zero-write and read back the complete new Windows data partition before formatting.
This is one destructive zero-pattern pass and can take a long time.
.TP
.B --yes
Skip the interactive destructive-operation confirmation.
.TP
.B --allow-fixed
Permit a non-removable whole disk after all other safety checks pass.
.TP
.B --allow-foreign-windows-architecture
Allow UEFI Windows media whose architecture does not match the ARM64 host. BIOS
media are architecture-gated separately and require x86-family Windows boot files.
.TP
.B --force-raw
Expert override that forces raw writing of a deliberately unrecognized or plain optical image.
.TP
.B --no-unmount
Do not issue initial unmount commands. The operation is still refused if a
filesystem is mounted at the final safety check.
.TP
.B --dry-run
Perform discovery, signature, size, source-identity, and target-safety checks without writing.
.TP
.BI --expected-identity " TOKEN"
Require the selected device to match a token returned by the JSON list command.
The graphical application always supplies this fail-closed check.
.SH SECURE BOOT DBX COMMANDS
.TP
.B dbx inspect (--file FILE | --firmware) [--json]
Parse and summarize an authenticated-update-format or firmware EFI DBX.
.TP
.B dbx update [--arch ARCH] [--output FILE] [--json]
Download the architecture-specific DBXUpdate.bin from Microsoft’s secureboot_objects repository and cache it with mode 0600.
.TP
.B dbx check (--dbx FILE | --firmware) --efi FILE [--json]
Calculate the PE/COFF Authenticode SHA-256 digest and inspect embedded PKCS#7 certificates. Exit non-zero when the image or an exact embedded certificate is revoked.
.TP
.B dbx scan (--dbx FILE | --firmware) --directory DIR [--json]
Scan bounded EFI boot files beneath a mounted directory.
.SH SIGNED IMAGE ACQUISITION COMMANDS
.TP
.B acquire verify --catalog FILE --signature FILE --public-key FILE [--json]
Verify the detached Ed25519 signature over the exact catalog bytes, reject expired or malformed metadata, and report the catalog digest and image count.
.TP
.B acquire list --catalog FILE --signature FILE --public-key FILE [--json]
List entries only after the complete signed catalog has passed strict schema, URL, filename, size, digest, redirect-host, and expiry validation.
.TP
.B acquire download --catalog FILE --signature FILE --public-key FILE --id ID [--output FILE|DIR] [--replace] [--json] [--json-progress]
Download one immutable catalog entry over HTTPS. Redirects are limited to hosts named by the signed catalog. The response must match the signed size and SHA-256. Data are written to a private temporary file, synchronized, and atomically installed only after verification. An existing file is reused only when its full size and hash match; a different regular file requires
.BR --replace .
.TP
.B acquire channel list [--config FILE] [--cache-dir DIR] [--offline] [--json]
Refresh and verify the package-owned built-in channel, or reverify only the cached metadata with
.BR --offline .
The channel requires canonical JSON, threshold Ed25519 root and catalog signatures, dual-authorized one-version-at-a-time root rotation through a versioned root URL, unexpired metadata, monotonic root/catalog versions, and rejection of a local clock more than 24 hours behind the last accepted metadata time. A network failure may use only an already verified and still-unexpired cache.
.TP
.B acquire channel download --id ID [--output FILE|DIR] [--replace] [--config FILE] [--cache-dir DIR] [--offline] [--json] [--json-progress]
Verify the built-in channel, select one signed immutable image, and use the same exact-size, redirect-host, SHA-256, cancellation, and atomic-install checks as the local catalog downloader. The package channel is disabled until reviewed offline root keys and production metadata are provisioned; no unsafe bypass is available.
Cancellation removes the temporary partial file.
.SH LINUX PERSISTENCE PLANNING
.TP
.B persistence plan --image FILE --media-root DIRECTORY --target-size SIZE [--size SIZE] [--json]
Inspect a plain raw-bootable ISOHybrid image and a read-only mounted or extracted media tree, then calculate an append-only persistence partition without modifying the image, directory, or any device.
.TP
.B persistence analyze --image FILE --expected-source-identity ID --target-size SIZE [--size SIZE] [--cancel-file FILE] [--json]
Open an identity-bound plain ISOHybrid image, mount its pinned file descriptor in a private workspace with read-only, no-suid, no-device, and no-exec options, run the same detector and planner, recheck the source identity, then unmount and remove the workspace. Only target capacity is accepted; no target-device path is opened. The graphical application supplies the source identity recorded before authentication and requires JSON plus a trusted per-user cancellation marker.
.PP
The manual planner and automatic analyzer share the same initial compatibility scope. The initial scope is Ubuntu 20.04 or newer casper media and Debian live-boot media. Ubuntu plans use the
.B persistent
boot parameter and an ext4 partition labeled
.BR casper-rw .
Debian plans use the
.B persistence
parameter, an ext4 partition labeled
.BR persistence ,
and a root
.B persistence.conf
containing
.BR / union .
The command validates occupied MBR entries or both GPT headers and entry-table copies, requires a free partition entry, reserves relocated GPT backup metadata where applicable, and reports boot configurations that require a parameter edit.
.PP
The separate experimental writer uses a fresh GPT layout with a FAT32 EFI System Partition and ext4 persistence partition. It is UEFI-only, requires an architecture-matching fallback bootloader, verifies both GPT copies, copies and rehashes a bounded FAT32-compatible media manifest, atomically enables the persistence boot parameter, re-detects the activated contract, and checks both filesystems. It remains CLI-only pending physical ARM64 qualification.
.SH PERSISTENCE QUALIFICATION
.TP
.B qualify start --record FILE --output FILE [--state-dir DIRECTORY] [--json]
Verify the canonical creation record and its SHA-256 sidecar, confirm that the current live system uses the expected architecture, UEFI, live-media family parameter, persistence parameter, and overlay root, then create a private persistent reboot marker. Write an initial JSON report and checksum sidecar. The default marker directory is
.BR /var/lib/rufusarm64/qualification .
.TP
.B qualify verify --record FILE --output FILE [--state-dir DIRECTORY] [--json]
Repeat the environment checks after a reboot, require a different Linux boot ID, and require the private marker to have survived. Write a verified JSON report and checksum sidecar. A successful result demonstrates persistence across that reboot only; it does not qualify every ARM64 system or firmware.
.PP
Reports contain hashed boot IDs and marker tokens, but omit hostnames, network addresses, storage serial numbers, product UUIDs, and the raw kernel command line. The creation-record checksum is tamper-evident rather than authenticated: a party able to replace both the record and its checksum can forge them.
.SH SAFETY
The program refuses partitions, read-only targets, the running root disk, and an
image stored on the selected target. It holds and hashes the selected source
through an open descriptor, refreshes target identity immediately before
destructive work, locks the target, verifies bundled boot assets, removes stale
signatures, flushes block buffers, and verifies copied files and filesystems.
.SH EXIT STATUS
Zero indicates success. A non-zero status indicates refusal, cancellation,
validation failure, I/O failure, filesystem failure, or verification mismatch.
.SH COPYRIGHT
GPL-3.0-or-later. Rufus is a separate project by Pete Batard and contributors.
No endorsement is implied.
