.TH RUFUSARM64 1 "23 July 2026" "RufusArm64 0.13.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
rufusarm64 \- graphical bootable USB creator and guarded data-media formatter for Ubuntu ARM64
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B rufusarm64
.RI [ --persistence ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B rufusarm64
opens the graphical RufusArm64 application. It creates raw Linux media and
supported Windows installation USB media after explicit target confirmation
and administrator authentication.
.PP
The
.B Download...
action opens the verified acquisition workflow. A package-enabled built-in
channel uses threshold-signed root and catalogue metadata with expiry and
rollback protection. The advanced recovery path accepts only a separately
trusted local catalogue, detached signature, and public key. Downloads perform
storage-space preflight, stream progress, can be cancelled, retain only an
owner-private signed-identity partial for later resume, and install the final
file only after its signed size and SHA-256 match. A failed or cancelled
transfer never installs an unverified image. The upstream project package may
ship with the built-in network channel disabled until public catalogue and
mirror operations are provisioned; the local signed-catalogue path remains
available.
.PP
Before Windows setup customizations are offered, RufusArm64 mounts the exact
identity-bound ISO read-only and inspects the complete installation metadata.
The options dialog reports the bounded edition count and names, whether the
payload is WIM, ESD, or a validated split SWM sequence, and the split-part
count. All editions must agree on Windows generation, client/server family,
and architecture or customization is disabled. RufusArm64 does not select an
edition automatically and ordinary media creation remains available without
customizations when product metadata cannot be classified safely.
.PP
The ordinary Create USB action preserves supported Linux raw/ISOHybrid images
byte-for-byte. Persistent-live creation is a separate guarded workflow.
.PP
For a plain recognized Linux raw or ISO image, RufusArm64 also performs a
bounded read-only compatibility inspection before erasure. It distinguishes a
hybrid disk layout from an optical-only ISO, validates El Torito BIOS and UEFI
catalogue entries, and reports ISOLINUX, SYSLINUX, or GRUB fingerprints found
in the referenced boot images. Optical-only media is disclosed as potentially
dependent on firmware USB-CD emulation. The inspection never executes or
mounts image content and does not claim that a physical computer will boot it.
.PP
The separate
.B Restore / format...
action erases the selected removable drive, removes any existing boot layout,
and creates one verified data-only partition using GPT or MBR and FAT32,
exFAT, NTFS, or ext4. RufusArm64 first runs an unprivileged dry-run, displays
the exact device identity, geometry, filesystem, label, required tools, and
warnings, and requires the generated FORMAT phrase before administrator
authentication. The graphical path cannot enable fixed-disk override or bypass
guarded unmounting.
.PP
Cancellation is reported precisely. A cancellation before erasure leaves the
drive unchanged. Cancellation or failure after erasure may leave incomplete
media that must be formatted again before use. A successful report confirms
the partition geometry and filesystem readback but explicitly does not claim
that the result is bootable.
.PP
After the main image writer finishes, RufusArm64 keeps the selected image and
shows explicit next steps. The completed medium can be left unchanged, another
copy can be created after choosing a different removable drive, or the exact
operation target can be passed to Restore drive for storage. That restoration
still performs a fresh identity-bound, unprivileged plan and requires the exact
FORMAT phrase before any erase. Failed or cancelled writes are conservatively
reported as potentially incomplete and are never reformatted automatically.
.PP
The separate
.B FreeDOS...
action erases the selected removable drive and creates deterministic FreeDOS
1.4 media from the package's checksum-pinned kernel and FreeCOM payload. It
plans without elevation, binds the refreshed device identity and capacity,
requires 512-byte logical sectors, displays the exact MBR/FAT32 geometry,
required write/readback byte totals, and platform warnings, and requires the
generated
.B WRITE FREEDOS 1.4 TO /dev/DEVICE FOR X86 BIOS LEGACY
phrase before administrator authentication. The graphical path exposes no
fixed-disk override or guarded-unmount bypass.
.PP
FreeDOS creation retains a nearly full-size FAT32 partition but writes and
reads back only the required final MBR, FAT32 boot/FSInfo, FAT-table, root,
payload, allocation-slack, and bounded head/tail clearing extents. Unallocated
data clusters are not overwritten during this fast creation path. The separate
.B Check USB
workflow remains the exhaustive whole-device write/readback qualification.
.PP
FreeDOS media created by this action is limited to x86-compatible processors
using BIOS or UEFI Legacy/CSM firmware. Required-extent structural readback and
SHA-256 verification do not prove that a particular physical computer will
boot the drive or that untouched free clusters are healthy.
.SH KEYBOARD AND ACCESSIBILITY
The main image and USB-drive labels are keyboard mnemonics. Primary actions
also expose underlined mnemonics without bypassing their normal validation or
confirmation dialogs. Additional shortcuts are:
.TP
.B Ctrl+R
Refresh removable USB drives.
.TP
.B Ctrl+D
Open verified image acquisition.
.TP
.B Ctrl+K
Open image checksums.
.TP
.B Ctrl+U
Open read-only UEFI media validation.
.TP
.B F1
Open About and licence information.
.PP
Icon-only controls, image compatibility, progress, operation details,
diagnostics, and post-operation actions have explicit assistive-technology
names. Compatibility and progress-detail text can be selected and copied. No
shortcut is bound directly to erasure or to cancellation of an active write;
the existing final confirmation and safe cancellation controls remain in
force.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B --persistence
Open the guarded persistent Ubuntu/Debian live-USB creator directly.
.SH SAFETY
Every selected target is erased logically. Verify the device model, capacity,
and path shown in the final confirmation dialog. A successful required-extent
write/readback or structural check does not prove unused media or particular
firmware. Use Check USB for exhaustive whole-device qualification.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR rufusarm64-cli (1),
.BR rufusarm64-nonbootable-format (1),
.BR rufusarm64-freedos-format (1),
.BR rufusarm64-persistence (1)
