.TH RUFUSARM64-DEVICE-QUALIFY 1 "20 July 2026" "RufusArm64 0.13.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
rufusarm64-device-qualify \- destructively test removable-media capacity and readback
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B sudo rufusarm64-device-qualify
.BI --device " /dev/DEVICE"
.RI [ options ]
.br
.B rufusarm64-device-qualify
.BI --device " /dev/DEVICE"
.B --dry-run
.RI [ --json ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B rufusarm64-device-qualify
runs the RufusArm64 address-pattern qualification engine against one explicitly
selected whole device. It is separate from the normal image writer and destroys
all previous content in every tested region.
.PP
The target is validated as a whole disk, checked against the running system
disk, bound to the listed identity and live capacity, opened exclusively,
locked, flushed through the held descriptor, and revalidated during the run.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BI --device " PATH"
Select the exact whole-disk device. Required.
.TP
.BI --profile " quick|full"
Select a bounded sampled test or a complete-capacity test. The default is
.BR quick .
.TP
.BI --region-size " SIZE"
Set the qualification region size. The default is 4 MiB.
.TP
.BI --expected-identity " TOKEN"
Require the identity token returned by
.BR "rufusarm64-cli list --json" .
When omitted for a direct terminal invocation, the current listed identity is
captured and revalidated before writing.
.TP
.B --dry-run
Validate the target and print the plan without opening it for writing.
.TP
.B --json
Emit one deterministic JSON plan or final report.
.TP
.B --no-unmount
Refuse a target with mounted descendants instead of unmounting removable-media
filesystems.
.TP
.B --allow-fixed
Permit an explicitly selected non-removable whole disk. The running system disk
remains refused.
.TP
.B --yes
Skip the interactive
.B ERASE /dev/DEVICE
confirmation. This mode requires an exact
.B --expected-identity
token and is intended only for controlled automation.
.TP
.BR --version , " -v"
Print the package version.
.SH EXIT STATUS
Zero indicates that all selected passes verified successfully. A nonzero status
indicates refusal, cancellation, I/O failure, data mismatch, or detected aliasing.
When
.B --json
is used, a completed report is emitted before a verification failure status.
.SH SAFETY
Do not use this utility on a device containing data that must be preserved. Use
.B --dry-run
first and verify the exact path, capacity, model, and identity token.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR rufusarm64-cli (1),
.BR rufusarm64 (1)
