.TH RUFUSARM64-DEVICE-BACKUP 1 "19 July 2026" "RufusArm64 0.12.1" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
rufusarm64-device-backup \- save a verified image of a removable drive
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B rufusarm64-device-backup
.B --device
.I /dev/DEVICE
.B --output
.I /absolute/path/drive.img
.RI [ options ]
.br
.B rufusarm64-device-backup
.B --device
.I /dev/DEVICE
.B --output
.I /absolute/path/drive.img
.B --dry-run
.RI [ --json ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B rufusarm64-device-backup
captures the exact reported capacity of one explicitly selected whole block device into a newly created image file.
The source is opened read-only, bound to its kernel device identity and capacity, and revalidated before and after capture.
The completed image is published atomically only after every byte has been copied, SHA-256 has been calculated, the file has been synchronized, and the source and destination identities have been rechecked.
.PP
The destination must not already exist, must have enough available space, and must be stored on a different disk from the selected source.
Mounted removable filesystems are unmounted before capture unless
.B --no-unmount
is supplied, in which case the command refuses mounted sources.
.SH GRAPHICAL WORKFLOW
In the installed RufusArm64 application, select a removable drive and choose
.BR "Save drive image…" .
Choose a new image pathname; existing files and symbolic links are refused.
RufusArm64 first runs the unprivileged planning mode and displays the exact source path, model, reported capacity, destination filesystem directory, required bytes, and available bytes.
.PP
Before authentication, the graphical workflow requires the exact phrase
.B SAVE /dev/DEVICE TO /absolute/path/drive.img
so the reviewed source and destination remain explicit.
The privileged command is then launched only with the selected path, exact identity token, guarded unmounting, deterministic JSON report, and schema-1 progress channel.
The dialog displays completed bytes, throughput, ETA, cancellation state, final SHA-256, and final image path.
.PP
Closing the dialog during capture requests cancellation of the owned process group and waits for incomplete temporary output to be removed before allowing the dialog to close.
Create USB and Check USB remain separate operations.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BI --device " /dev/DEVICE"
Select the whole source disk. Partitions and paths outside
.I /dev
are refused.
.TP
.BI --output " PATH"
Absolute path for the new image file. The path must not already exist.
.TP
.BI --expected-identity " TOKEN"
Require the exact identity token returned by
.BR rufusarm64-cli " list --json".
This option is mandatory with
.B --yes
or
.BR --allow-fixed .
.TP
.B --dry-run
Validate the source metadata and destination storage and print a plan without opening the source device.
.TP
.B --json
Emit one deterministic JSON plan or report. A non-dry-run JSON invocation also requires
.B --yes
and
.BR --expected-identity .
.TP
.B --progress-json
With a non-dry-run
.B --json
invocation, emit bounded schema-1 progress records as JSON lines on standard error while keeping the final deterministic report on standard output.
This channel is intended for the packaged graphical workflow and reports completed bytes, total bytes, elapsed time, throughput, and ETA when available.
.TP
.B --yes
Skip terminal confirmation. This is accepted only with an exact expected identity.
.TP
.B --allow-fixed
Permit a non-removable whole disk. This is terminal-only, requires an exact expected identity, and does not override root-disk or protected-mount refusals.
.TP
.B --no-unmount
Refuse a source that has mounted filesystems instead of unmounting eligible removable-media mounts.
.TP
.BR --version , " -v"
Print the installed version.
.TP
.BR --help , " -h"
Print usage information.
.SH SAFETY
The source is never opened for writing. Nevertheless, a coherent drive image requires mounted filesystems to be unmounted so that filesystem state does not change during capture.
The normal graphical path is restricted to removable or USB-attached whole disks, exact identity binding, guarded unmounting, deterministic JSON, and noninteractive execution after the graphical confirmation.
.PP
No final destination pathname is created until verified capture completion. Incomplete temporary files are removed after failure or cancellation. Existing destination files are never replaced.
.SH TESTING CHECKLIST
For an engineering or stage package, use an expendable removable drive and destination storage on a different physical disk.
Confirm that planning reports the expected model and capacity, an existing destination is refused, cancellation leaves no final image, a completed image has the reported size and SHA-256, and the source drive remains readable afterward.
.PP
Also confirm that Create USB and Check USB remain disabled while capture is active, the device list refreshes after completion, and reinstalling or removing the package does not alter existing image files.
Remove the package with the normal Debian package manager; manually created image files are user data and are not deleted automatically.
.SH EXAMPLES
Inspect a planned capture without root privileges:
.PP
.nf
rufusarm64-device-backup --device /dev/sdb \
  --output /home/user/usb-backup.img --dry-run
.fi
.PP
Capture after reviewing the plan:
.PP
.nf
sudo rufusarm64-device-backup --device /dev/sdb \
  --output /home/user/usb-backup.img
.fi
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR rufusarm64 (1),
.BR rufusarm64-cli (1),
.BR rufusarm64-device-qualify (1)
