.TH RUFUSARM64-FREEDOS-FORMAT 1 "20 July 2026" "RufusArm64 0.13.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
rufusarm64-freedos-format \- create verified FreeDOS 1.4 media on one removable drive
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B rufusarm64-freedos-format
.B --device
.I /dev/DEVICE
.B --dry-run
.RI [ --json ]
.PP
.B sudo rufusarm64-freedos-format
.B --device
.I /dev/DEVICE
.RI [ --expected-identity\ TOKEN ]
.RI [ --label\ LABEL ]
.RI [ --no-unmount ]
.RI [ --yes ]
.RI [ --json ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B rufusarm64-freedos-format
constructs the pinned minimal FreeDOS 1.4 image directly on a removable whole disk.
The resulting media targets x86-compatible processors and BIOS or UEFI Legacy/CSM firmware.
It does not boot ARM64 systems or UEFI-only systems.
.PP
The command validates the complete deterministic MBR/FAT32 plan before opening the target,
requires exact identity and capacity continuity, refuses disks backing the running root filesystem,
retains an exclusive descriptor lock, performs a final safety check immediately before writing,
synchronizes the target, and compares a complete byte-for-byte readback before reporting reusable media.
Software verification does not prove that a particular physical PC will boot.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BI --device " /dev/DEVICE"
Select one canonical removable whole-disk path. Required.
.TP
.BI --expected-identity " TOKEN"
Require the exact identity token reported by
.B rufusarm64-cli list --json
before and after confirmation. Required with
.B --yes
and for graphical/pkexec use.
.TP
.BI --label " LABEL"
Set the uppercase FAT volume label. The default is
.B FREEDOS.
.TP
.B --dry-run
Validate and display the exact deterministic plan without opening the device for writing.
.TP
.B --yes
Skip the interactive phrase only when
.B --expected-identity
is also supplied.
.TP
.B --no-unmount
Refuse a mounted target instead of guarded unmounting. This option is unavailable to the graphical path.
.TP
.BI --cancel-file " PATH"
Use an owner-only cancellation marker beneath
.I /run/user/UID.
This is reserved for the authenticated graphical helper path.
.TP
.B --json
Emit one deterministic JSON plan or execution report. A destructive JSON run also requires
.B --yes
and
.B --expected-identity.
.SH CONFIRMATION
Interactive execution requires this exact phrase, with the selected device substituted:
.PP
.nf
WRITE FREEDOS 1.4 TO /dev/DEVICE FOR X86 BIOS LEGACY
.fi
.PP
Any mismatch stops before the target is opened for writing.
.SH CANCELLATION AND FAILURE
After the first accepted byte, cancellation or I/O failure is reported with
.B media_changed=true
and
.B reusable=false.
The target is reusable only after the complete write, synchronization, byte-for-byte readback,
final identity validation, unlock, and close all succeed.
.SH SECURITY
There is no fixed-disk override. The packaged Polkit action authorizes only the package-private
.B /usr/lib/rufusarm64/rufusarm64-freedos-format
helper and does not retain authorization.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I /usr/lib/rufusarm64/rufusarm64-freedos-format
Package-private privileged helper.
.TP
.I /usr/share/doc/rufusarm64/freedos/
Pinned provenance, release contract, metadata, and complete corresponding source archives.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR rufusarm64-cli (1),
.BR rufusarm64 (1)
